satrājitastvamatha lubdhavadarkalabdhaṃ
divyaṃ syamantakamaṇiṃ bhagavannayācī: |
tatkāraṇaṃ bahuvidhaṃ mama bhāti nūnaṃ
tasyātmajāṃ tvayi ratāṃ chalato vivoḍhum ||1||
satrājita:-	from Satraajit
tvam-atha	Thou then
lubdha-vat-	greedy man like
arka-labdhaṃ	from the sun attained
divyaṃ syamantaka-maṇiṃ	divine Syamantaka jewel
bhagavan-ayācī:	O Lord Thou asked for
tat-kāraṇaṃ	the reason
bahu-vidhaṃ	many fold
mama bhāti nūnaṃ	to me appeals indeed
tasya-ātmajāṃ	his daughter
tvayi ratāṃ	in Thee infatuated
chalata: vivoḍhum	by strategy to marry
Thou then like a greedy man asked for the divine Syamantaka jewel from Satraajit who had got it from the Sun god. O Lord! The reasons for this may be many. What appeals to me indeed is that this was a strategy by which Thou wanted to marry his daughter (Satyabhaamaa) who was in love with Thee.
adattaṃ taṃ tubhyaṃ maṇivaramanenālpamanasā
prasenastadbhrātā galabhuvi vahan prāpa mṛgayām |
ahannenaṃ siṃho maṇimahasi māṃsabhramavaśāt
kapīndrastaṃ hatvā maṇimapi ca bālāya dadivān ||2||
adattaṃ taṃ	not giving that
tubhyaṃ maṇivaram-	to Thee the precious jewel
anena-alpa-manasā	by him the narrow minded
prasena:-tat-bhrātā	Prasena, his brother
gala-bhuvi vahan	in the neck wearing
prāpa mṛgayām	went hunting
ahan-enam siṃha:	killed him the lion
maṇi-mahasi	in the jewel brilliance
māṃsa-bhrama-vaśāt	for flesh mistaking,
kapīndra:-taṃ hatvā	the great monkey him (the lion) killing
maṇim-api ca	the jewel also and
bālāya dadivān	to (his) child gave
The narrow minded one (Satraajit) did not give the precious jewel to Thee. His brother Prasena wore it round his neck and went away hunting. A lion mistook the jewel because of its brilliance to be a lump of flesh and so he killed Prasena. The great monkey (Jaambavaana) killed the lion and gave the jewel to his child.
śaśaṃsu: satrājidgiramanu janāstvāṃ maṇiharaṃ
janānāṃ pīyūṣaṃ bhavati guṇināṃ doṣakaṇikā |
tata: sarvajño'pi svajanasahito mārgaṇapara:
prasenaṃ taṃ dṛṣṭvā harimapi gato'bhū: kapiguhām ||3||
śaśaṃsu:	talked about
satrājit-giram-anu	Satraajit's words following
janā:-tvāṃ maṇi-haraṃ	the people, Thou jewel thief
janānāṃ pīyūṣaṃ	for the people nectar like
bhavati guṇināṃ	it is of the virtuous
doṣa-kaṇikā	fault slightest
tata: sarvajña:-api	therefore knowing everything also
sva-jana-sahita:	Thy people along with
mārgaṇa-para:	to search intent
prasenaṃ taṃ	that Prasen
dṛṣṭvā harim-api	seeing the lion also
gata:-abhū:	went
kapi-guhām	(into) the monkey's cave
Influenced by the allegations of Satraajit, people suspected that Thou had stolen the jewel. Even a slight fault in the conduct of the virtuous person is like nectar for people in general, for it gives them a chance to slight that person. In spite of the fact that Thou knew everything about the jewel, Thou went in search for it with Thy men. Thou saw Prasena and the lion lying dead and thus were led to the monkey (Jaambavaan's) cave.
bhavantamavitarkayannativayā: svayaṃ jāmbavān
mukundaśaraṇaṃ hi māṃ ka iha roddhumityālapan |
vibho raghupate hare jaya jayetyalaṃ muṣṭibhi-
ściraṃ tava samarcanaṃ vyadhita bhaktacūḍāmaṇi: ||4||
bhavantam-avitarkayan-	Thee not identifying
ati-vayā:	due to age
svayaṃ jāmbavān	himself Jaambavaan
mukunda-śaraṇaṃ	to Mukunda surrendered
hi mām ka:-iha	indeed me, who here
roddhum-iti-ālapan	is to obstruct, thus saying
vibho raghupate	O Lord Raama!
hare jaya jaya-iti-alaṃ	O Hari! Victory to Thee! Thus
muṣṭibhi:-ciraṃ	with fists for long
tava samarcanam vyadhita	Thy worship performed
bhaktacūḍāmaṇi:	the crest jewel of the devotees
The aged Jaambavaan did not know Thy identity and so exclaimed, 'who has come to obstruct me who has Mukund as his only resort?' As, the crest jewel of the devotees, he was invoking Thee with "O Lord Raam! O Hari! Victory be to Thee!, he worshipped Thee with blows of his fists.
budhvā'tha tena dattāṃ navaramaṇīṃ varamaṇiṃ ca parigṛhṇan |
anugṛhṇannamumāgā: sapadi ca satrājite maṇiṃ prādā: ||5||
budhvā-atha	recognizing (Thee) then
tena dattāṃ	by him was given
nava-ramaṇīṃ	to the young girl (his daughter)
vara-maṇiṃ ca	the precious jewel and
parigṛhṇan	accepting
anugṛhṇan-amum-	blessing him
āgā: sapadi	returning immediately
ca satrājite	and to Satraajit
maṇiṃ prādā:	the jewel gave back
Finally when Jaambavaan recognized Thee, he gave to Thee his young daughter and the jewel. Thou accepted them and blessed him, and immediately returned and gave back the jewel, the Syamantaka Mani, to Satraajit.
tadanu sa khalu brīlālolo vilolavilocanāṃ
duhitaramaho dhīmān bhāmāṃ giraiva parārpitām |
adita maṇinā tubhyaṃ labhyaṃ sametya bhavānapi
pramuditamanāstasyaivādānmaṇiṃ gahanāśaya: ||6||
tadanu sa khalu	thereafter he indeed
brīlā-lola:	shame filled with
vilola-locanāṃ	with loving eyes
duhitaram-aho	the daughter Oh!
dhīmān	the intelligent one (Satraajit)
bhāmān	Satyabhaamaa
girā-eva	by words only
para-arpitām	given to another
adita maṇinā	gave (along with) the jewel
tubhyam labhyam	to Thee, the worth getting
sametya bhavān-api	having got, Thou also
pramudita-manā:-	with a happy mind
tasya-eva-ādāt-	to him only gave back
maṇim	the jewel
gahana-āśaya:	deep thinking (Thou)
Satraajit, the intelligent one, was then filled with shame for his conduct with Thee. He had given away his roving eyed daughter Satyabhaamaa to someone verbally only. He gave her to Thee along with the jewel. Thou, happily, with Thy deep and unfathomable reasoning gave back the jewel, having got what was worth getting (Satyabhaamaa).
vrīlākulāṃ ramayati tvayi satyabhāmāṃ
kaunteyadāhakathayātha kurūn prayāte |
hī gāndineyakṛtavarmagirā nipātya
satrājitaṃ śatadhanurmaṇimājahāra ||7||
vrīlā-ākulāṃ	by shyness overcome
ramayati tvayi	(her) delighting (when) Thou were
satyabhāmām	her Satyabhaamaa
kaunteya-dāha-	the son's of Kunti's burning
kathayā-atha	news, then
kurūn prayāte	Thou to Kurukshetra went away
hī	how shameful
gāndineya-kṛtavarma-girā	by Akrura and Kritavarmaa's words
nipātya satrājitaṃ	killing Satraajit
śatadhanu:-maṇim-ājahāra	Shatadhanu the jewel took away
When Thou were delighting the shy Satyabhaamaa, there was the news of Kunti's sons being burnt in the wax palace. So Thou went away to the land of the Kurus. Under the promptings of Akrura and Kritvermaa, Shatadhanu killed Satraajit and took away the jewel.
śokāt kurūnupagatāmavalokya kāntāṃ
hatvā drutaṃ śatadhanuṃ samaharṣayastām |
ratne saśaṅka iva maithilagehametya
rāmo gadāṃ samaśiśikṣata dhārtarāṣṭram ||8||
śokāt	due to grief
kurūn-upagatām-	to the country of Kuru's having come
avalokya kāntāṃ	seeing (Thy) wife
hatvā drutaṃ śatadhanuṃ	killing quickly Shatadhanu
samaharṣaya:-tām	appeased her
ratne saśaṅka iva	about the jewel doubting, as though
maithila-geham-etya	to the king of Mithila's abode reaching
rāmo gadāṃ	Balaraam the mace wielding
samaśiśikṣata	taught well
dhārtarāṣṭram	to Duryodhana
Satyabhaama was overcome with grief and went to Kurukshetra. Seeing her, Thou quickly killed Shatadhanu and made her happy. As though doubting the whereabouts of the jewel, Balaraam went to the abode of the king of Mithilaa. There he very well trained Duryodhana in the art of wielding the mace.
akrūra eṣa bhagavan bhavadicchayaiva
satrājita: kucaritasya yuyoja hiṃsām |
akrūrato maṇimanāhṛtavān punastvaṃ
tasyaiva bhūtimupadhātumiti bruvanti ||9||
akrūra eṣa	Akrura, this
bhagavan	O Lord!
bhavat-icchayā-eva	by Thy will alone
satrājita: kucaritasya	of Satraajit, the notorious
yuyoja hiṃsām	caused the death
akrūrata: maṇim-	from Akrura the jewel
anāhṛtavān puna:-tvaṃ	did not take back again Thou
tasya eva bhūtim-	his alone prosperity
upadhātum-	to bring about
iti bruvanti	so it is said
This, Akrura, O Lord! By Thy will alone caused the death of the notorious Satraajit. It is said that with a mind to bring about his prosperity, Thou did not take back the jewel from Akrura.
bhaktastvayi sthiratara: sa hi gāndineya-
stasyaiva kāpathamati: kathamīśa jātā |
vijñānavān praśamavānahamityudīrṇaṃ
garvaṃ dhruvaṃ śamayituṃ bhavatā kṛtaiva ||10||
bhakta:-tvayi	devoted to Thee
sthiratara:	very firmly
sa hi gāndineya:	that indeed Akrura
tasya-eva	his also
kāpatha-mati:	evil mind
katham-īśa jātā	how O Lord! was produced
vijñānavān	all knowing
praśamavān-aham-	well self controlled am I
iti-udīrṇaṃ garvaṃ	thus bloated vanity
dhruvaṃ śamayitum	certainly to curb
bhavatā kṛtā-eva	by Thee was brought about only
Akrura was very firmly devoted to Thee. O Lord! How could there be an evil thought in his mind (of killing Satraajit and getting the jewel)? He was bloated with the vanity of having self knowledge and self control. Certainly to curb that, Thou brought this about.
yātaṃ bhayena kṛtavarmayutaṃ punasta-
māhūya tadvinihitaṃ ca maṇiṃ prakāśya |
tatraiva suvratadhare vinidhāya tuṣyan
bhāmākucāntaśayana: pavaneśa pāyā: ||11||
yātaṃ bhayena	having fled in fear
kṛtavarmayutaṃ	Kritvarma along with
puna:-tam-āhūya	again calling him
tat-vinihitam ca	with him hidden and
maṇim prakāśya	the jewel bringing out
tatra-eva suvrata-dhare	there only (him) with good deeds, endowed
vinidhāya tuṣyan	retaining and satisfying him
bhāmā-kucānta-śayana:	(on) Satyabhaamaa's bosom reclined
pavaneśa pāyā:	O Lord of Guruvaayur! Save me
Akrura with Kritvarma fled in fear. Thou called him again and brought out the jewel hidden with him. Thou then let him retain the jewel who was of good conduct, and satisfied him. Thou then lived happily with Satyabhaamaa reclining on her bosom. O Lord of Guruvaayur! save me.